[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. [music]
>> And I'm Tracy Alloway. So Tracy, we
recently published that episode about
what it was like to have done business
during the Maduro years in Venezuela.
That was from a grain perspective. And I
think one thing that's very obvious is
[snorts] that sure, Venezuela may have
plenty of natural resources,
uh oil obviously, but also other ones.
And perhaps that the relationship
between uh the US and the uh current
government may be better than it was.
But there is going to be, you know,
actually reviving the economy, actually
getting in a place of stability and
thriving, that's a That's a very long
way off, to say the least.
>> Right. So, if you have oil in the
ground, that's great, but it's in the
ground and you need to actually extract
it in order to make money. And also, in
order to encourage the type of people
who would extract it, you need to have
some sort of reliability
>> Yeah. in place, right? There has to be
some sense of stability of the future.
Otherwise, as we heard from our previous
discussion, people just aren't going to
want to go there and do business. Right.
So, one of the points that he brought
up, which I think is very germane to the
future and the questions about the
country's future, is that, you know, he
talked about if there was a talented
engineer who worked on some sort of
processing plant, in his case he was
talking about Cargill obviously, if
there was someone who was like talented
in the sort of technical side of them,
they hired them in Mexico, you know,
they hired them elsewhere. So many
people left. And when you think about
the security situation on the ground,
even again, let's say somehow the
foreign money wants to come back in,
this question of talent and the question
of like where are they and do they want
to come back and what it would take to
get them to come back such that you can
actually sort of produce natural
resources among other things profitably,
that's a huge difficult element and
there's no switch that you can flip. I'm
also just interested in Venezuela's
economy from a historical perspective.
Uh one because I feel like Central and
South America have been a blind spot for
us for various reasons. I've been to
Venezuela once, but I think it was on a
cruise when I was the only cruise I ever
went on when I was like 9 years old and
all I remember is getting off the boat
and like
being there for a few hours and seeing a
lot of stray dogs that I thought were
really cute and I wanted to take home
with me. That's all I remember. Well,
other than that, it didn't leave a few
marks on your psyche.
>> about the economy. But also, I find it
really interesting because here we have
an economy which seems to have coalesced
around one specific resource.
>> Yes. But as we learned from that
episode, they do make some other things.
And so I'm curious about the tradeoffs
between, you know, encouraging the oil
industry versus other types of jobs and
businesses. There's a lot to discuss.
And one other element before we get into
this that I think is very important is
you hear a lot about how prior to Hugo
Chavez coming to power
>> Mhm. Venezuela was a fairly well-off
country. But and again, it speaks to
maybe the current moment, we know just
looking internationally
that there is really not any sort of
obvious connection between natural
resource endowments and the wealth of
the public, right?
>> curse.
>> The resource curse, right? And there are
plenty of places that have a lot of oil
or some other commodity where the
general public is impoverished or does
not live particularly well. I think this
is where you get a lot of that element
of the rule of law and skilled labor and
all of these things that are certainly
unevenly distributed throughout the
world and are not correlated necessarily
with the existence of commodities.
Anyway,
someone that we've had on the podcast
before,
who has talked a lot about these things,
some of the preconditions for
sustainable growth. We've talked to him
about all this multiple times. He
happens to be the perfect guest because
he was previously part of economic
policy making in Venezuela in the '90s.
He was a minister of planning. He was
also more member of the board of the
Central Bank. Truly the perfect guest.
So I'm thrilled to welcome back on the
podcast Ricardo Hausmann, who is
currently professor at the Harvard
Kennedy School, director of the Harvard
Growth Lab. So Ricardo, thank you so
much for coming back on Odd Lots. Truly
the perfect guest in the perfect moment.
Thank you. Thank you so much for having
me. Why don't you I'm trying to think
where to start. Why don't you tell us
about You've been at Harvard for 26
years, but as I mentioned, you used to
be in policy making in Venezuela prior
to the Chavez years. Why don't you tell
us a little bit about your history
there? Well, if you want to understand
Venezuela, you have to
really understand the fact that it's a
very mature oil country.
Oil became important starting in 1917
with Royal Dutch Shell. Then in the
1920s, Standard Oil of New Jersey came
in,
now Exxon.
And by 1929,
Venezuela was the largest oil exporter
in the world. And remained the largest
oil exporter in the world until 1965
when it was taken over by Saudi Arabia.
And in that period, going to say 1978,
1980 between say 1917 and 1978
say it was sent you know
60 years. Venezuela was probably the
fastest growing country in the world.
And it was the country with the lowest
inflation rate in the world.
And it
it had a fixed exchange rate with the
dollar. It had
you know a very developed financial
market. It was a country of very very
large immigration.
So that say in the census of 1960 7% of
Venezuelans were born in Europe.
In mostly Spain, Italy, Portugal,
but also it was a source of attraction
of Colombians, Dominicans, Ecuadorians,
etc. So it was a very prosperous
country.
And then got in the 1970s the oil boom
and the oil boom
made us think very very big. Then came
the second oil shock of the Iran-Iraq
war and that brought in even more money.
And then suddenly
the in the 1980s the price of oil
collapsed.
Oil revenues collapsed and the US jacked
up interest rates like crazy in the
early 80s and that led to a debt crisis
by 1983.
And from 1983
to [snorts] around 1989
it's what in Latin America was called
the lost decade of the 80s.
We were all in a big you know balance of
payments crisis.
That was very painful. Happened.
Venezuela is the country in the world
that went from triple A to default
more quickly. It did so it was triple A
like in 1981
and it defaulted in 1983. Wow.
So it was
and then the 80s were quite complicated.
Then in the early 90s with President
Carlos Andres Perez and his minister
Miguel Rodriguez
and others Moises Naim and and other
ministers I participated on that
government
a very major structural adjustment was
done
that restructuring opening the economy.
And the 90s were a period of a difficult
recovery. Oil was very volatile going up
and down but by 1998
you had the the Russian crisis
and the price oil collapsed dramatically
interest rates went through the roof
financial markets dried up and it is in
that year 1998 that we had elections and
the public said what the hell you told
us that all these reforms are going to
pay off
you know where is the money etc. There
was no money because the price oil had
gone down to something like $8 a barrel
but the truth is that they voted for
Chavez massively voted for Chavez.
>> [snorts]
>> And it Chavez started you know very
moderately at the beginning but as time
went on and as price the price of oil
recovered and we had a spectacular boom
between 2004 and 2014 in the price of
oil well Chavez felt that he was
empowered he had the money the oil money
was coming in he thought given all the
oil money that he that was coming in he
could borrow against it.
He put all these policies to restrict
the private sector he nationalized
everything that moved he created these
socialist enterprises left and right
they all went broke eventually but he
imposed exchange controls import
controls price controls
if it moved you controlled it
and by 2012
he was very sick with cancer, but he ran
for the election. He died
probably immediately after the election.
We don't know exactly the day when he
died because he didn't didn't appear
publicly after early December, but they
announced his death in in March of 2013.
The year 2012, they the government spent
as if the price of oil was at $200 a
barrel
when it was only at $100 a barrel.
So, they borrowed as if it was going out
of fashion.
And then suddenly in 2013-2014,
the price of oil collapsed
to something like in the 30s.
So, it's not that they had to go from
100 to 30 or
no, it's that they were spending at 200
and borrowing. And when the price of oil
collapsed, nobody wanted to lend to
Venezuela.
So, suddenly they had no dollars, no
dollars to import raw materials, spare
parts, seeds, fertilizers, whatever, and
production came tumbling down.
And it was the biggest economic collapse
that ever happened in human history
outside of wars. And bigger than the
collapse that happened in most wars. So,
without money coming in, they still had
to pay for a huge public sector that
they had created. So, he just printed
money.
Maduro
took out five zeros out of the currency.
And barely three and a half years later,
he took six more zeros out of the
currency. This is a hyperinflation never
seen before. Maybe, I don't know, in
Germany in the 1920s and for a brief
period in Germany after the Second World
War. It's it's something that has never
happened. The financial system went from
being like 80 billion dollars in assets
to like 1 billion dollars in assets.
Jeez. So, it was a total collapse of the
economy. 8 million people left the
country.
Now, you have to ask yourself a
question. What the hell? This is not the
only oil country in the world. I mean,
what happened to Saudi Arabia? What
happened to Kuwait? What happened to
United Arab Emirates or Kazakhstan or
Azerbaijan? We never heard of a collapse
of this magnitude just because the price
of oil went down.
So, what really happened is that the
price of oil went down
in a system that presumed that people
had no rights and all the money was in
the government. And when now the
government doesn't have the money,
people are left with no rights and
nothing moves.
And that's the underlying reason for the
Venezuelan collapse.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That was a fantastic
>> summary of Venezuelan economic history.
I like speaking to uh professors because
I don't even have to ask questions.
>> It's so
>> listen.
>> Yeah, cuz those are all the questions I
was going to ask.
>> Yeah, that was great. Okay. Well,
actually, a serious question, though.
Were there any
real efforts throughout, I guess, the
1900s, last century, to diversify
Venezuela's economy away from oil? Yes,
that was the mantra in Venezuela. It's
harder to do than to say, right? It
the the mantra was that we were going to
sow the oil.
Hm. We're going to sow the oil. And so,
we developed our hydro potential in the
south of the country. We have the best
hydroelectric river in the world, the
Caroní River. It should be producing
like 32
gigawatts of power. And by the way,
24/7, if you want, 365 days a year. It's
It's fantastic from It's a It's a
hydrological marvel.
It's not producing 8 megawatts.
8 gigawatts. So so it's they they messed
that up to
we were going to use that to produce
aluminum, steel.
We have enormous agricultural potential
especially with a agricultural
revolution that has happened in mostly
in Brazil in the last 20 years. It
didn't reach Venezuela during Chavismo.
So we could be producing over 12 million
hectares and we are producing on less
than a a million.
So
so the potential for diversification is
huge but the story of Venezuela has been
the story of this incredible uncertainty
over what the future brings because
we have not managed the the volatility
in oil incomes in a way that protects
the domestic economy. So more than you
know just the old Dutch disease of being
you know you're earning so many dollars
that you're so appreciated that other
things are not competitive. It's really
that since the 1980s
it's been up and down up and down in oil
incomes that have made the economy quite
unpredictable.
And the only way to deal with that is to
protect the economy from oil price
volatilities through stabilization funds
and those
I wrote the law for the stabilization
fund but
the moment Chavez got in that's the
first thing he killed.
I was just going to ask since you were
on the board of the Central Bank, you
know we know that in a lot of resource
rich countries the approach of the
Central Bank they might just peg to the
dollar, you know something very simple.
What was the sort of general philosophy
of the Central Bank when you were on it?
How did it think about sterilizing
foreign currencies, preventing
inflation? What was what was the
framework that the Central Bank used?
That's a that's a very good question,
because Venezuela until 1983
had pegged the exchange rate to the
dollar. Except
in one small crisis we had in the early
'60s, and then when the US devalued the
currency
in 1971-72 when it abandoned the Bretton
Woods agreement, we the US devalued, we
revalued visa vie the US, but we had
fixed exchange rates, so it was very
simple fixed exchange rate. The market
believed the exchange rate was fixed and
pegged, and it worked quite well until
the 1983 crisis. And then in the 1983
crisis, first they tried
exchange controls, multiple exchange
rates. And when I was at the Central
Bank,
we decided to unify the exchange rate,
to float, and to adopt something more
like inflation targeting. Got it. But it
it was it was not easy to do because uh
uh you know, inflation targeting is
easier to achieve when when inflation is
under control and things are more
stable. So, we had a pretty bumpy road.
Mhm.
You know, you mentioned that stability
fund. As a policy maker, what was it
like to witness, I guess, the the
transition to the Chávez administration,
and I guess see some of your your work,
your earlier work dismantled? Well, it
was initially quite gradual.
Um
Chávez left the the finance minister
from the previous administration. She
gave some confidence to markets, and he
first thing he did is he changed the
constitution. And the constitution
concentrated power in the presidency. It
went from two chambers of Congress to a
single chamber of Congress. And then and
then the checks and balances were
eroded.
Uh
and but what really changed his mind was
the moment the price of oil went up, he
felt he no longer needed society. Mhm.
That the private sector needed him, he
didn't need the private sector. So, he
started
he had the money to buy everybody off,
but
he expropriated,
didn't pay for most of it,
and created an environment in which
people thought that they really had no
rights. You had your property could be
taken away, you could not set prices,
you could not buy foreign exchange
without permission, and they to buy to
get that permission, you had to behave.
Um and so, it created an environment, a
quite oppressive environment. By the
way, we had a free press and and now
there is no free press whatsoever. So,
it's it's this erosion of rights,
property rights, information rights,
voting rights,
just
political rights. So, it was the
complete erosion of all rights and the
transformation of a long-standing
democracy into a dictatorship. It was
quite horrible to watch. I think one of
the most surprising aspects and now that
I think about it from our recent
conversation,
was just how long some of these
businesses stuck it out under a
deteriorating situation. You'd think,
"Okay, you get this hyperinflation." And
you hear these stories about, "Okay, are
there some warehouses full of sugar
somewhere that we can sell abroad so
that we can get the hard currency in in
order to buy, you know, buy spare parts,
etc." This idea that like, you know, it
was it was not a it was a sort of slow
boil, so to speak, and then big
international companies, they didn't
leave right away. They actually they
kept trying to make it work for as long
as they possibly could. Yeah,
absolutely. And
and it was
uh I mean, Cargill is a good example in
your in your previous show. Cargill,
uh you know, the government nationalized
international trade. So, you had to buy
you had to sell everything through a
state-owned company that would buy on
behalf of your customers.
And they were the ones kind of siphoning
the differential between the official
exchange rate and
and the and the market exchange rate or
the black market exchange rate, which
was at some stages, you know, 10 to 1,
100 to 1. So, the best business was to
sell a dollar at the parallel rate
and convert that into dollars at the
official rate. That would have been a
rate of return of 10,000% in a day. So,
so it was it was that that craziness in
in that led to
to the economic collapse that I
mentioned before. Since we're talking
about dollars, talk to us a little bit
about the impact of sanctions. So, you
know, you were no longer a policymaker
when those sanctions came into effect,
but
I I think part of the difficulty when it
comes to assessing Venezuela right now
is we're trying to figure out how much
of the economic issues there are the
result of sort of homegrown structural
issues versus external factors like the
sanctions that have been in place for
two decades now. No, the sanctions
haven't been in place for two decades.
The sanctions The sanctions were
actually imposed uh starting around
second half of 2017.
And the economy imploded The The worst
implosion was in the year 2016.
Uh in the year 2016, the government cut
back on imports by something like 85%
Imports of food, imports of medicine.
They They just collapsed imports. I
wrote an article in those days
suggesting
that Venezuela should go to the IMF and
restructure its debt
because since it had borrowed so much
money and the price of oil had declined
so much and it had no savings,
it could not keep on servicing the debt
and it it would need to restructure its
debt. Ideally it was some support from
the IMF.
So I asked the question in in the title
of that article was
should Venezuela default?
And
and that got me banned from the country.
So
fortunately I published it abroad but it
gives you an idea of how
>> this?
This was the year 2016.
>> Okay. Before sanctions. Okay. 2015-2016
before sanctions. So it was the writing
was on the wall. The the the oil
production had collapsed because in 2000
and 3 Chavez fired the the oil company
had gone on strike because Chavez was
messing with their
meritocracy with their hierarchical
rules of you know what you needed to do
to reach a certain level in the in the
structure of the company which was a
culture that we inherited from Exxon
Mobil and from from Shell. They were
sort of like the two large producers in
Venezuela before we they were
nationalized in the 70s.
But so it was a deep culture in that in
in that
company.
They went on strike. Chavez fired
20,000 out of 32,000 starting from the
top. So he eliminated all the human
capital of that company and
immediately production started to
decline. We had the capacity to refine
1.3 million barrels of oil a day. Today
we can't refine 100,000. We import
gasoline.
So so they this destruction way precedes
any sanctions.
Now the sanctions were imposed because
Maduro started to get farther and
farther away from democratic norms. And
it was a way of
trying to force him to
to to to move back to democratic norms
and
and instead he radical he became more
radicalized in his
in his thing. But it just to tell you
the importance of human capital in all
you might say oil is not that important,
you know, human it's kind of like a
basic industry.
When they kicked out the Venezuelan oil
engineers,
they went to Colombia. There was a field
in Colombia called Rubiales.
It was producing 30,000 barrels of oil a
day.
The Venezuelan oil engineers came in and
in no time they it was producing
250,000 barrels a day. So it's it just
you need to know
what it is that you're doing. Well, that
human capital they kicked out,
that's the real collapse of the
Venezuelan oil production. And then
obviously, he could have negotiated
around sanctions, but he would rather be
poor and in power
than, you know,
provide some more rights and norms and
and and and maybe risk losing an
election. That's truly a remarkable
statistic about that that Colombian oil
field.
I want to get to the present tense soon
and talk about the challenges now, but
maybe to help us understand, you know,
through these years of deterioration,
whether we're talking about the latter
years of Chavez or the earlier years of
Maduro,
what was the constituency that allowed
them to stay in power despite these
disruptions? Because even the most
absolute dictator anywhere to some
extent has to have some credibility with
some pocket that's powerful, something
that preserves, I would I would think,
etc. Talk to us about where was the
constituency for this new trajectory of
the country that sort that started under
Chavez?
So, initially the constituency was very
large, but as the economy started to
deteriorate and as people thought that
there was less and less opportunities
within that regime,
Maduro had to get nastier.
So, Chavez was very, you know, liked, if
you want.
>> Yeah. He was popular in in uh he could
actually win elections.
Maduro couldn't really win elections,
and so he had to get nastier and
nastier. So, today
what you have is essentially extreme
repression. Extreme repression not only
on civil society, but extreme repression
on the military. They distrust the
military to death.
They have a secret police for civilians
called Sebin, and then there's a secret
police for the military called the GSIM.
And the GSIM has hundreds of officers in
jail. They are the worst treated
political prisoners in Venezuela. They
are starved, they're tortured. They have
deeply penetrated all the communications
of anybody in the army. The Cubans are
deeply into it. They're using Russian
technology, so that they're trying to
prevent the army from organizing against
the government. So, the army is not
really there to defend the country.
That's why
the attack on January 3rd was such a
cakewalk. It's that you know, the army
was there to
to be kind of controlled so that it they
won't uh
Huh. they break from the government. So,
that's the It's It's really a
That's why in the election of July 28th,
2024, in spite of the fact that they
didn't let 8 million Venezuelans abroad
vote, in spite of the fact that they did
not let 3 million young Venezuelans
register for the first time in the
electoral rolls.
Uh in spite of the fact that they did
not let the candidate that won the
primaries to run, Maria Corina Machado,
she appointed somebody who nobody knew.
She raised his hand and he won 70-30.
He would have won 85-15 if if other
people had been allowed to vote.
Now, that's a margin. Even 70-30, that's
a margin that you haven't seen Trump
win, you know, Sheinbaum,
you know, nobody wins by those margins.
So, there is a huge political majority
in Venezuela for change that has that is
behind one clear political leadership.
So, Venezuela is not Iraq. Venezuela is
not a polarized country. Venezuela is a
unified country.
In those elections,
uh the opposition won in all 24 states.
They won in 90% of the 335
municipalities. That means it's a
natural There's a political majority in
Venezuela that wants to go in a
different direction. But, there's a
small clique that's trying to prevent
it.
And so, that is the current situation.
And that's my concern, that uh the Trump
administration has announced that they
want to rule by indirectly by
controlling that clique when when there
is a big political majority that wants
to go in a different direction.
>> [music]
[music]
>> This was actually going to be my next
question. So, we're now up to January
2026. Maduro is gone.
The US says it wants more private
investment in Venezuela. So, maybe, you
know, some of the sanctions issues go
away. But, on the other hand, the acting
president is straight out of the Maduro
regime and it doesn't seem that you're
having any significant political or
structural change. Is that right? Well,
it's very hard to read exactly what the
Trump plan is for Venezuela. Marco Rubio
had talked has talked about three
phases. First, stabilization, then
recovery, and then eventually a
political transition.
I think and I have argued that it's the
wrong phasing.
Because there's going to be very little
recovery
unless you know what is the those rules
of the game, what is what is the what
are the rights that people have? Right
now, people in Venezuela are afraid to
speak, are afraid to to
to do anything because they're still
being deeply harassed and put in jail
for just you know, tweeting something or
for having an an opinion or for you
know, they have put in jail young girls
in order to pressure military officers
that have say broke rank and they want
them to
to to turn themselves in. So, it's a
very oppressive regime and and the idea
is that yes, we are going to give this
regime orders of what to do even though
at the heart they are the ones that
brought the economy to where it is. And
the idea is we're now going to eliminate
sanctions, but it's not sanctions that
destroyed the Venezuelan oil industry.
It was the the expropriations that were
done in 2007 and 2009. It was the firing
of all the oil workers in 2003.
It was the rules that they created for
the oil industry. In the oil industry,
according to the law, production can
only happen through the national oil
company or in joint ventures with the
national where the national oil company
has 51% of its shares. The national oil
company is broke. It's in default with
all its creditors. So, if if it were to
receive some dollars in some bank
account in the US,
you know, there are judgments in US
courts that would freeze those assets to
pay creditors. So, nobody wants that as
a partner. So, it is in this context
that, you know, Trump says, "Oh, I want
US companies to go back." Well, the law
doesn't allow for those companies to go
back. And if you want to change the law,
who's going to change the law? Well, we
had stolen elections last year for the
National Assembly that the US does not
recognize. Latin America does not
recognize. Europe does not recognize.
There is no legitimate power to change
the hydrocarbons law.
Right now, you have a dollar at the
official rate of 300 and something and
the black market rate is at
400, 500, 600. It reached 1,000.
So, if you're going to invest, at what
exchange rate do you come in? At what
exchange rate do you convert your
profits back out?
It's it's it What the president of Exxon
said, that Venezuela is uninvestable,
it's just a description of reality.
It's it's the in
the the system was not designed for
private investment independent of
sanctions.
And that's that's what needs to change,
but it needs to change through a
government that has legitimacy to change
things. That you know, is perceived as
being, you know, the the reflection of
the will of the people that, you know,
they are the ones who decided that, you
know, what course of action to take. I
don't think any serious investor is
going to go in into such a messy
situation. I certainly take your point
and it certainly sounds very logical
what you say, that you're never going to
get real investment of capital. You're
certainly not going to get this sort of
perhaps re-migration of talent that left
and so forth until there's some sort of
political stability, until there's some
sort of confidence. This is the new
thing. But how do you
do that functionally? I mean, clearly
sanctions didn't work, right? Sanctions
didn't have any effect on removing the
Maduro regime. There is not an impulse
to put boots on the ground, American
troops and so forth. It doesn't seem
like there's any appetite. So, is there
some mechanism in which the Trump
administration, even if it wanted to
take your advice and put political
stability before economic revival,
does it does the tool exist practically
to establish that sequence?
I think it does, and I think you might
see them moving in this direction in the
coming days and weeks.
And I think that it's important that
they listen
to the fact that, you know, they this is
not they you know, they are obsessed
about not committing the mistake that
the US made in Iraq.
>> Right.
But but Iraq has nothing to do with
Venezuela. Iraq is, you know, a country
that goes back to Mesopotamia. It was
5,000 years old. In those 5,000 years,
until Saddam Hussein, there had never
been an election. There had never been
political parties. In Venezuela was
democracy. We have political parties. We
ran an election not 100 years ago, in
2024.
We were able to secure the results of
those elections because we had 600,000
people across the whole country
supervising and protecting the votes for
for the opposition. You have a political
organization, a majority political
organization there. So, what you need to
do
right now is to say is to tell the army
we're not going to fire you the way they
fired all the army in Iraq. You tell the
bureaucracy we're not going to fire the
way you fired all the the bureaucracy in
Iraq. Everybody's going to have their
their their salaries. Everybody's going
to have their pensions. Right? But they
are going to
be under civilian control. And if you
know you you tell them you know you you
they have already seen what happened to
Maduro.
They are very clear that it's much
cheaper a treatment ala Soleimani.
Right? You don't have to
put the special forces on the ground to
extract somebody. You know, ala
Soleimani you just send some missiles
and no boots on the ground. So, the
pressure you can put to say
listen guys
let's define
a
timetable for elections. Let's define a
credible electoral council to supervise
those elections and with international
supervision. Let's have a date for those
elections. Let's open up the rolls so
that young people can register and
diaspora can register. And we [snorts]
have an election on a certain date. And
by the way, you have to free all the
political prisoners. You have to allow
the diaspora to go back
and you have to allow a free press.
Otherwise, you get the Soleimani
treatment. And I tell you that if you do
those things, what is society going to
do? They're going to want to participate
in those elections to organize for those
elections to start thinking about the
future and to have the credibility that
the future is going to be possible
because there will be a democratic
government committed to a market
economy.
Not not a socialist government under
threat of American attack.
And with a cash flow controlled by
the American power. So, that is a much
better situation in which to recover the
economy, to achieve social peace, and to
have a Venezuela become prosperous
again. Could you have some sort of
hybrid structure here where
Venezuela maintains some aspects of
socialism, but also tries to reintroduce
those market signals that you've been
talking about? First of all, I don't
understand exactly the logic of a
hybrid. You you mean
like when Trump won the election, did
you say, "Why don't we have a hybrid?"
You know, why why do you know, one-off
trick? You know, why do we need a
hybrid? There there is a majority
political opinion in Venezuela in favor
of one direction.
If it has to be done gradually for X or
Y reason, let them figure it out.
It's not There is something that has
failed and has failed catastrophically.
There is no other catastrophic failure
that you can compare to the collapse of
the Venezuelan economy.
People want change.
They There is a state that is not
working. By the way, Venezuela is going
to have a free education, free health
care, free free many things because
that's kind of like in the DNA. Don't
It's always been The consensus is by US
standards relatively liberal.
By US standards, that sounds very
socialist. Yeah. Yeah, exactly.
So,
the problem is not socialism, not
socialism.
The problem is
individual rights,
freedom,
property rights,
free press. Those are the basic things
because those things convert individuals
into agents of their own destiny, and
that's how you get investment. That's
how you get the economy going.
If if if the Venezuelans abroad don't
feel that it's a it's a place where they
can live in freedom safely. The human
capital of the country has left. It
won't want to come back. But if you tell
them, "Look, recovery is coming in a
free place with a government that that
wants a restitution of rights."
Venezuelans have has always been a
country of immigration, not
out-migration. It's a country that that
a has been a source of attraction of
people everywhere. So, that transition,
I tell you, that transition can be done
quickly
and without
conflict
if enough pressure is put on the clique
that has sequestered the government.
That's why they can't get votes. That's
why they Look, even in the voting
centers
in military bases
the government lost 70 to 30.
It's in spite of it its repression. So,
let let the majority of Venezuela,
something that did not exist in Iraq, it
did not exist elsewhere. It's a society
that has undergone a catastrophe and has
[clears throat] learned from that
catastrophe. It has figured out what
doesn't work and what course of action
it wants to continue.
So, I want to say I take your point
absolutely that there that as you put it
very well, Venezuela in your view is not
a polarized society. There is a
consensus. There is a view both
domestically and Venezuelans abroad that
there needs to be major political
change. And I certainly take your point
highly intuitive that you're not going
to get the influx of capital or talent
until that political change takes place.
On the other hand,
you know, [snorts] when you when the US
just kidnapped the head of state, which
is a shocking turn of events. I think
we're all shocked the day that we woke
up on January 3rd. And you're talking
about, you know, you say the Soleimani
treatment. So, that is assassination
that you're saying should be would be
the threat against the click. Do you see
possibility that you essentially
engender a sort of
I don't know about a necessarily defense
of the existing regime, but a defense of
sovereignty that what is this other
country doing kidnapping our head of
state? What is this other country doing
threatening to assassinate the people
who who run our government? This is our
government, etc. Do you not see or am I
Is it completely off the mark to talk
about risk of backlash there and the
impulse to rally around the flag and
sovereignty when another country is
being this aggressive about controlling
our government? I think that's why
narratives matter. Okay. And I don't
particularly like the narrative that
sometimes Trump uses.
The narrative about the US getting into
Europe in the Second World War
was we came to liberate, not to conquer.
Okay? That's the idea. We came to
liberate, not to conquer. Today in
Venezuela, Trump is very popular.
Getting rid of Maduro is super popular.
Why? Because the perception is that we
had been taken over by Cubans. You saw
that in the attack on January 3rd,
Cuba announced that 32
of its members were killed because that
was the security apparatus around
Maduro. Maduro didn't rely on
Venezuelans for his security. He relied
on Cubans for his security because he
doesn't trust Venezuelans. So, the
perception was that we were a colony of
Cuba, if you want. We were a colony of
foreign interests. And now we want to
get back to our freedom. So,
the the the narrative I would want to US
to stick to
>> [snorts]
>> is we came to liberate not to conquer.
We came to reestablish your freedom and
if freedom gets reestablished,
Venezuelans will naturally be a good
partners of the US as they had
historically been. The fact that
Trump is popular in Venezuela
is an in is is a condemnation of
Chavismo.
It's how disastrous these guys have
been.
How aligned with foreign powers that
have
nothing to do with with us, you know,
they're aligned with Cuba, they're
aligned with Russia, they're aligned
with
>> [music]
>> Iran, they're aligned with Belarus. So
it's it's that kind of government that
has taken over with no domestic
political base that is being threatened
to be kicked out and that's why I think
it makes the transition so much easier.
Professor Hausmann, thank you so much
for coming back on Odd Lots. Fascinating
perspective, truly the perfect guest.
Really appreciate you taking your time
to chat with us. Thank you. Thank you
for having me. Thank you, Ricardo.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Tracy, that was a fascinating
conversation from someone who I guess I
would say has an unmatched perspective,
right?
>> Mhm. The that is a an excellent view to
get from someone who has both served in
government but also has made it his
career as an economist to talk
essentially about some of these human
capital problems that will certainly
beset Venezuela for a very long time
regardless of how the political
situation unfolds. You know, I can't
think of Ricardo without thinking about
monkeys swinging from trees and his
description of how countries actually
develop new industries and how one area
can lead into a new more technologically
advanced area. But anyway, one thing
that stuck out from that conversation
for me, which is, you know, the emphasis
on institutional and structural decline
versus the external factors like the
sanctions.
>> Yeah. And it seems to me that that makes
it more difficult in in the current
environment, right? Because again,
US involvement in Venezuela I don't even
know how to describe it nowadays, would
suggest that maybe dollar shortages
aren't going to be as much of a thing as
they were in the past. Maybe sanctions
go away, stuff like that. But if the
major problem is that institutional
decay and the acting president is still
in still from the Maduro regime, that
seems a much harder problem to solve. By
the way, your last question about
whether or not US involvement maybe like
coalesces Venezuelans
um around a sort of nationalist regime.
Uh there's a headline out right now
saying that Venezuela's acting president
says she's had enough of US orders. So,
you know, you got kind of like a a
glimmer of it. It seems very tough and
to talk about the Soleimani treatment,
that's a euphemism for assassination of
I'm not even sure it's a euphemism.
>> It's not even it's not even a euphemism
at all. Look, I certainly take the point
though that this idea of let's get the
economic stabilization done first and
then the political stabilization, that
might simply be impossible. And I
thought Professor Hausmann did a great
job of laying out the sort of the
reality of human capital and the idea
that, you know, this is not just a vague
thing of we want talented people back.
And that stat about the Colombian oil
field, very remarkable. But then also
some of the legal aspects of why the
system is not designed as it currently
is for multinational oil companies to
come back into the country, but on the
other hand, I mean again, sanctions
didn't work for years to get Maduro out.
We've had sanctions against Cuba for how
long? They don't work. Like getting the
government you want, even if you're much
more powerful than the other country, is
far from a trivial exercise in almost
every example that we can think of.
Absolutely. Well, I'm also thinking back
to again that episode that we did with
the Cargill employee and this idea that
well maybe maybe if you have enough
private investors,
multinationals that come together and
say, you know, we are interested in
Venezuela, but we need to see the
following changes. Maybe that acts as
some sort of catalyst to strengthen up
the rule of law, but it's a sort of
chicken and egg situation, right?
Because those companies need to be
incentivized. They need to want to come
in
to Venezuela. Yeah. In order to advocate
for like the conditions that would make
it possible for them to enter Venezuela.
I wonder how much vacancy there is at
the apartment complex where Assad is
living in Moscow. Like the question is
like how many people need to be promised
a very cushy retirement in a nice gated
Moscow high-rise
for them to say, "Okay, we're just we'll
just do this the easy way." I'm curious
like what the what the number would be
and how much capacity there is for that
movement. That would be the
sounds like it could be a solution, but
I don't know if that's really on the
table. That would be an interesting
statistic. I don't think you're going to
get it anytime soon, but anyway, shall
we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The Stalwart.
Follow our guest Ricardo Hausmann. He's
at Ricardo Hausmann. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Armendariz, Elliott Bennett at Dash
Butt, and Kilburgs at Kilburgs. For more
Odd Lots content go to
bloomberg.com/oddlots
or read daily newsletter and all of our
episodes and you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our discord
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
[music] these ongoing Venezuela
discussions, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
[music] platform. And remember, if you
are a Bloomberg subscriber, you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
ad-free. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg [music] channel on Apple
podcast and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.
>> [music]
[music]